Small clean up for Propagators. (#577)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/context/api-propagators.md

Cross-cutting concerns send their state to the next process using
`Propagator`s, which are defined as objects used to read and write
context data to and from messages exchanged by the applications.
Each concern creates a set of `Propagator`s for every supported
`Propagator` type.

`Propagator`s leverage the `Context` to inject and extract data for each
cross-cutting concern, such as traces and correlation context.

Propagation is usually implemented via library-specific request
interceptors, where the client-side injects values and the server-side extracts them.

The Propagators API is expected to be leveraged by users writing
instrumentation libraries.

## Propagator Types

A `Propagator` type defines the restrictions imposed by a specific transport

> and bound to a data type, in order to propagate in-band context data across process boundaries.

Author: It means each Propagator type works on different data type, i.e. text propagators work on text carriers, binary will work with byte buffers, etc. Wondering if adding an example here will be better.

The Propagators API currently defines one `Propagator` type:

- `HTTPTextPropagator` is a type that inject values into and extracts values
  from carriers as string key/value pairs.

A binary `Propagator` type will be added in the future.

### Carrier

A carrier is the medium used by `Propagator`s to read values from and write values to.
Each specific `Propagator` type defines its expected carrier type, such as a string map
or a byte array.

Carriers used at [Inject](#inject) are expected to be mutable.

### Operations

`Propagator`s MUST define `Inject` and `Extract` operations, in order to write
values to and read values from respectively. Each `Propagator` type MUST define the specific carrier type

> and CAN define additional parameters.

Author: Oh, I remember we didn't want to use `interface` for `Propagator`s - that is because a Text and a Binary Propagator *might not* being able to actually share a base interface (mostly because of the different carriers being used).

supporting current `Context` state, this argument is OPTIONAL, defaulting to the current `Context`
instance.
- The carrier that holds the propagation fields. For example, an outgoing message or HTTP request.

#### Extract

Extracts the value from an incoming request. For example, from the headers of an HTTP request.

If a value can not be parsed from the carrier for a cross-cutting concern,
the implementation MUST NOT throw an exception and MUST NOT store a new value in the `Context`,
in order to preserve any previously existing valid value.

Required arguments:

- A `Context`. For languages supporting current `Context` state this argument is OPTIONAL, defaulting
to the current `Context` instance.
- The carrier that holds the propagation fields. For example, an incoming message or http response.

Returns a new `Context` derived from the `Context` passed as argument,
containing the extracted value, which can be a `SpanContext`,
`CorrelationContext` or another cross-cutting concern context.

## HTTPText Propagator

`HTTPTextPropagator` performs the injection and extraction of a cross-cutting concern

> value as string key/values pairs into carriers that travel in-band across process boundaries.

Author: The carrier itself *might not* be a list of string/key pairs (even if it can be deserialized as such). Also, using key-value pairs keep things more generic, as opposed to introducing the notion of a map.

Encoding is expected to conform to the HTTP Header Field semantics. Values are often encoded as

> RPC/HTTP request headers.

Author: Let's remove it for now - we can add it later with a proper, longer explanation if needed.

and bound to a data type, in order to propagate in-band context data across process boundaries.

The Propagators API currently defines one `Propagator` type:

- `HTTPTextPropagator` is a type that inject values into and extracts values
  from carriers as string key/value pairs.

A binary `Propagator` type will be added in the future.

### Carrier

A carrier is the medium used by `Propagator`s to read values from and write values to.
Each specific `Propagator` type defines its expected carrier type, such as a string map
or a byte array.

Carriers used at [Inject](#inject) are expected to be mutable.

### Operations

`Propagator`s MUST define `Inject` and `Extract` operations, in order to write
values to and read values from respectively. Each `Propagator` type MUST define the specific carrier type
and CAN define additional parameters.

#### Inject

Injects the value into a carrier. For example, into the headers of an HTTP request.

Required arguments:

- A `Context`. The Propagator MUST retrieve the appropriate value from the `Context` first, such as
`SpanContext`, `CorrelationContext` or another cross-cutting concern context. For languages

> supporting current `Context` state, this argument is OPTIONAL, defaulting to the current `Context`

Reviewer: I would remove this sentence. There's nothing difficult in calling `Propagator.inject(Context.current())` instead of expecting propagator to call `Context.current()`, and passing the context explicitly decouples the propagator from the implementation details of the context, i.e. it would work with explicitly propagated context just as well, without depending on thread-local model.

Reviewer 2: On the other hand, you would then couple all the instrumentations to the "implementation details" of the context layer which seems worse.

Reviewer: I don't think it's worse. From what we've seen in OpenTracing in Python world, which had a lot of different async frameworks, or even in Java when looking at more Rx-like space, it is pretty difficult to disentangle the instrumentation from specific context propagation framework being used. Thread-local is only one option among many, which would be forced onto everyone if the API allows not passing in the Context. Also, we can always build an additional abstraction _above the context layer_ if we want instrumentation to be really agnostic, without coupling Propagators to thread-locals.

instance.
- The carrier that holds the propagation fields. For example, an outgoing message or HTTP request.

#### Extract

Extracts the value from an incoming request. For example, from the headers of an HTTP request.

If a value can not be parsed from the carrier for a cross-cutting concern,
the implementation MUST NOT throw an exception. It MUST store a value in the `Context`
that the implementation can recognize as a null or empty value.

Required arguments:

- A `Context`. For languages supporting current `Context` state this argument is OPTIONAL, defaulting
to the current `Context` instance.
- The carrier that holds the propagation fields. For example, an incoming message or http response.

Returns a new `Context` derived from the `Context` passed as argument,
containing the extracted value, which can be a `SpanContext`,
`CorrelationContext` or another cross-cutting concern context.

> If the extracted value is a `SpanContext`, its `IsRemote` property MUST be set to true.

Reviewer: Maybe this line should exist elsewhere. It very narrowly applies to trace propagator only and is pretty easy to miss.

Author: It's already mentioned in the trace API docs, so just extended it there a little bit.

Cross-cutting concerns send their state to the next process using
`Propagator`s, which are defined as objects used to read and write
context data to and from messages exchanged by the applications.
Each concern creates a set of `Propagator`s for every supported
`Propagator` type.

`Propagator`s leverage the `Context` to inject and extract data for each
cross-cutting concern, such as traces and correlation context.

Propagation is usually implemented via a cooperation of library-specific request
interceptors and `Propagators`, where the interceptors detect incoming and outgoing requests and use the `Propagator`'s extract and inject operations respectively.

The Propagators API is expected to be leveraged by users writing
instrumentation libraries.

## Propagator Types

A `Propagator` type defines the restrictions imposed by a specific transport

> and is bound to a data type, in order to propagate in-band context data across process boundaries.

Reviewer: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/711

- The carrier that holds the propagation fields. For example, an incoming message or http response.

Returns a new `Context` derived from the `Context` passed as argument,
containing the extracted value, which can be a `SpanContext`,
`CorrelationContext` or another cross-cutting concern context.

## HTTPText Propagator

`HTTPTextPropagator` performs the injection and extraction of a cross-cutting concern
value as string key/values pairs into carriers that travel in-band across process boundaries.

The carrier of propagated data on both the client (injector) and server (extractor) side is
usually an HTTP request.

`Getter` and `Setter` are optional helper components used for extraction and injection respectively,
and are defined as separate objects from the carrier to avoid runtime allocations,
by removing the need for additional interface-implementing-objects wrapping the carrier in order
to access its contents.

`Getter` and `Setter` MUST be stateless and allowed to be saved as constants, in order to effectively
avoid runtime allocations.

### Fields

The propagation fields defined. If your carrier is reused, you should delete the fields here
before calling [inject](#inject).

> Fields are defined as string keys identifying format-specific components in a carrier.

Reviewer 2: Maybe it would be more clear to define fields as the key-value pair and then use `field key` or `field name` below.

Author: I'd rather so that as a follow up in order to make progress and merge this PR ;)

Trying to clarify: you are suggesting we only change the *terms* used (and update the document with them), not the actual return value (a list of strings), right?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I was just trying to clarify terminology, not suggesting an actual content change.

The Propagators API is expected to be leveraged by users writing
instrumentation libraries.

## Formats

> A `Format` defines the restrictions imposed by a specific transport in

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this is correct. E.g. a binary formats would not necessarily be map-based, so the difference is not only in restrictions.

Author: data-type should be mentioned as well here, you mean? Otherwise, please elaborate, so I can improve this part ;)

order to propagate in-band context data across process boundaries.

The Propagators API currently consists of one `Format`:

- `HTTPTextFormat` is a format that injects values into and extracts values from carriers as
  text.

A binary `Format` will be added in the future.

### Carrier

A carrier is defined as a medium that `Format`s use to read values from and

> write values to. Carriers used at[inject](#inject) are expected to be mutable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
write values to. Carriers used at [inject](#inject) are expected to be mutable.
```

- allow pre-allocation of fields, especially in systems like gRPC Metadata
- allow a single-pass over an iterator

> Returns list of fields that will be used by the `HttpTextPropagator`.

Reviewer 2: This section is missing a definition of what a "field" is. Like "the keys in the carrier that will be read or written by the propagator". Also, I'm not sure if "field" is the best name / if it necessary to introduce a new term for this concept. Maybe "keys" (already used previously in this spec) or "headers" or "header names" would be better?

Author: Let's stick to `fields` for now and will add an explanation.

### Inject

> Injects the value downstream. The required arguments are the same as defined by

Reviewer 2: I would be glad if we could avoid the unspecific upstream/downstream terminology.

```suggestion
Injects the value into a carrier. The required arguments are the same as defined by
```

> Injects the value downstream. The required arguments are the same as defined by

Reviewer 2: > `The required arguments are the same as defined by the base [Inject](#inject) operation.`

Then why repeat them? This is just introducing an opportunity for subtle unintended differences.

Author: I'm sure I'm not repeating them for Inject/Extract - I'm only listing the optional and additional arguments:

```
### Inject

Injects the value downstream. The required arguments are the same as defined by
the base [Inject](#inject) operation.

Optional arguments:

- A `Setter` invoked for each propagation key to add or remove. This is an additional
  argument that languages are free to define to help inject data into the carrier.
```

That being said, I'm wondering whether I should remove the related `Composite` propagator sections on Inject/Extract.

Reviewer 2: Oops, I think I missed "required" when reading the quoted sentence.

`Setter` MUST be stateless and allowed to be saved as a constant to avoid runtime allocations.

#### Setter argument

Setter is an argument in `Inject` that sets values into given fields.

`Setter` allows a `HttpTextPropagator` to set propagated fields into a carrier.

One of the ways to implement it is `Setter` class with `Set` method as described below.

##### Set

Replaces a propagated field with the given value.

Required arguments:

- the carrier holding the propagation fields. For example, an outgoing message or an HTTP request.
- the key of the field.
- the value of the field.

The implementation SHOULD preserve casing (e.g. it should not transform `Content-Type` to `content-type`) if the used protocol is case insensitive, otherwise it MUST preserve casing.

### Extract

Extracts the value from an incoming request. The required arguments are the same as defined by
the base [Extract](#extract) operation.

Optional arguments:

- A `Getter` invoked for each propagation key to get. This is an additional
  argument that languages are free to define to help extract data from the carrier.

Returns a new `Context` derived from the `Context` passed as argument.

> `Getter` is defined as a separate object from the carrier to avoid runtime allocations,

Reviewer 2: Much redundancy with Setter.

Author: Regarding the clarification on them being separated objects in order to avoid extra allocations? In that case, we could mention both of them in a single line.

It not, please elaborate ;)

- allow pre-allocation of fields, especially in systems like gRPC Metadata
- allow a single-pass over an iterator

> Returns list of fields that will be used by the `HttpTextPropagator`.

Reviewer: I find this Fields section very confusing and not well-worded (e.g. what does "Returns..." refer to?) Let's revisit it in another PR. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/712

- allow pre-allocation of fields, especially in systems like gRPC Metadata
- allow a single-pass over an iterator

Returns list of fields that will be used by the `HttpTextPropagator`.

### Inject

Injects the value downstream.

Required arguments:

- A `Context`.
- The carrier that holds propagation fields. For example, an outgoing message or http request.

> - The `Setter` invoked for each propagation key to add or remove.

Reviewer: Why can't the carrier provide the needed methods to set key/values? Context and carrier are all that's required for propagator to inject data.

Reviewer 4: This is to avoid one unnecessary allocation in languages like Java. If we do not have a Setter (which does the `conversion` between carrier interface and the real carrier) we need to always wrap the raw carrier in a class that implements the carrier interface defined by us.

Reviewer: this needs to be explained/documented in the spec

Author: @yurishkuro Thanks, will add an explanation in this section ;)

Reviewer 4: Please do :)

Author: Added a very small explanation based on @bogdandrutu's feedback and also moved the `Setter`/`Getter` stateless/constant explanation to appear next to it.

Let me know if this needs further tuning.

- the key of the field.
- the value of the field.

The implementation SHOULD preserve casing (e.g. it should not transform `Content-Type` to `content-type`) if the used protocol is case insensitive, otherwise it MUST preserve casing.

### Extract

Extracts the value from an incoming request. The required arguments are the same as defined by
the base [Extract](#extract) operation.

Optional arguments:

- A `Getter` invoked for each propagation key to get. This is an additional
  argument that languages are free to define to help extract data from the carrier.

Returns a new `Context` derived from the `Context` passed as argument.

`Getter` is defined as a separate object from the carrier to avoid runtime allocations,
removing the need for additional objects wrapping the carrier that access its contents
through a given interface.

`Getter` MUST be stateless and allowed to be saved as a constant to avoid runtime allocations.

#### Getter argument

Getter is an argument in `Extract` that get value from given field

`Getter` allows a `HttpTextPropagator` to read propagated fields from a carrier.

One of the ways to implement it is `Getter` class with `Get` method as described below.

> ##### Get

Reviewer: Jaeger won't be able to implement its propagation format if only Get(key) is available. Should this include the iterator over keys as well?

Author: This should be covered by future work done as part of #433

Reviewer: #433 is about multi-valued headers, different from iterator. I booked #713.

- the carrier of propagation fields, such as an HTTP request.
- the key of the field.

> The Get function is responsible for handling case sensitivity. If the getter is intended to work with a HTTP request object, the getter MUST be case insensitive. To improve compatibility with other text-based protocols, `HTTPTextPropagator`s MUST ensure to always use the canonical casing for their attributes. NOTE: Canonical casing for HTTP headers is usually title case (e.g. `Content-Type` instead of `content-type`).

Reviewer: > To improve compatibility ...

I don't follow this last part. If getter is case insensitive, there's no "canonical casing" that comes into play. Only if the Getter supports iterator it makes sense to talk about casing, but I wouldn't bother either, just return whichever the underlying request object returns.

Author: Agreed. Removed it.
